# Teardown

## Introduction

In this lab, we will tear down the resources created in your tenancy and the directory in the Oracle cloud shell.

Estimated Time: 10 minutes

Quick walk through to tear down the resources created in your tenancy and the directory in cloud shell.

### Objectives

* Teardown the setup

### Prerequisites

* Have successfully or partially completed lab 1

## Task 1: Run teardown

To begin teardown, run the following command below. The teardown script will delete the cloud resources generated by Oracle Kubernetes Engine (OKE) and the Oracle DB Operator for Kubernetes. The teardown script will also run terraform destroy to terminate the rest of the lab-related resources.
    ```bash
    <copy>
    (cd $CB_STATE_DIR ; ./teardown.sh)
    </copy>
    ```

The teardown script will run terraform destroy in the background. While this is running in the background, you can check the status of whether the teardown process has completed by checking the state. 

You can directly watch the terraform output as it completes by running:
```bash
<copy>
tail -f $CB_STATE_DIR/logs/*-terraform-destroy.log
</copy>
```


## Task 2: Delete the workshop directory
When done with the lab, you can delete the workshop directory and the application repository on __Cloud Shell__. Make sure you are on the directory where you cloned the repository.

```bash
<copy>
    rm -rf cbworkshop && rm -rf oci-react-samples
</copy>
```

## Acknowledgements

* **Authors** - Norman Aberin, Developer Advocate
* **Last Updated By/Date** - Norman Aberin, August 2022
