# Introduction

Welcome to the High Availability focus area of the LiveLab! This section is dedicated to providing in-depth information about the latest high availability features in Oracle AI Database 26ai. With this release, Oracle continues to push the boundaries of technology, ensuring mission-critical applications can operate with minimal downtime and maximum data protection. While this is not an exhaustive list of new features, we will spotlight several particularly significant ones: Rolling Patching for Complex Changes, DBMS_ROLLING with Transparent Application Continuity, RAC Fast Pluggable Database Open, Faster Oracle Data Guard Role Transitions, Data Guard Redo Decryption for Hybrid DR Configurations, and Real-time Query for PDB Standby. This section will be updated over time. 


## About Oracle AI Database 26ai

Building on the strengths of its predecessor, Oracle AI Database 26ai represents the latest long-term support release, delivering new cutting-edge technology. Just like Oracle Database 19c, version 26ai provides best-in-class support for all data types, including the new Vector data type along with relational, JSON, XML, spatial, graph, and more, with industry-leading performance, scalability, availability, and security for various workloads.

Users of Oracle Database 19c and 21c can directly upgrade to Oracle AI Database 26ai.

Check out this guide for free access and a hands-on guide to get some experience:
[Hitchhiker's Guide for Upgrading to Oracle Database 19c & Oracle AI Database 26ai](https://livelabs.oracle.com/pls/apex/dbpm/r/livelabs/view-workshop?wid=3943)

## About High Availability New Features

This section provides information about some of the new High Availability features in Oracle AI Database 26ai.

* **Rolling Patching for Complex Changes:** Rolling Patching has long been the answer to reducing maintenance-related downtime for the database, which is critical from the MAA perspective. Unfortunately, some patches cannot be applied via rolling patching in just one operation. For those “complex changes,” Oracle AI Database 26ai has introduced two features allowing for the application of otherwise non-rolling patches in stages. Oracle RAC Two Stage Rolling Updates and Deferred SQL Patching enable the application of the patch (software update) and the activation via SQL at different times of the rolling patch application process, thereby enabling patches to be patched in a rolling fashion.
* **DBMS\_ROLLING with Transparent Application Continuity:** DBMS\_ROLLING enables the automated rolling application of version-changing upgrades and patch sets. Transparent Application Continuity hides database downtime from users by assisting in draining sessions up to a set timeout and then replaying the remaining sessions after the role transition. Together, Transparent Application Continuity and DBMS\_ROLLING hide the final switchover needed at the end of the automated process. This feature allows applications requiring MAA Gold Tier RTOs to experience a brownout instead of a blackout during the server reboot interval of the upgrade process, with the resulting downtime surfacing in the application as a performance blip.
* **RAC Fast Pluggable Database Open:** Open PDBs in an RAC database up to 2x faster by performing an open operation in parallel with DLM reconfiguration, another critical enhancement tied to multitenant activities in an MAA Gold Tier deployment. This feature is especially vital given that all Oracle AI Database installations from 21c onward utilize Multitenant architecture.

Excellent, you say, but what about the Oracle AI Database 26ai features that impact MAA Gold for unexpected outages? Oracle AI Database 26ai includes many new features that greatly enhance high availability, scalability, and disaster recovery from that perspective, including a couple in the security category, keeping in mind that security breaches can and often do significantly impact availability. The key features and enhancements below tackle many unexpected downtime scenarios, including performance issues related to scalability problems that can impact your data and application.

* **Faster Oracle Data Guard Role Transitions:** Oracle Data Guard 26ai provides Lower RTO through various role transition optimizations, such as introducing additional pre-emptive actions to prevent stalls. The team's internal MAA testing showed role transitions approximately 3.5x faster than 19c using maximum performance protection mode with fast-start failover (an essential RTO requirement for the MAA Gold tier).
* **Data Guard Redo Decryption for Hybrid DR Configurations:** Oracle Data Guard now provides the capability to decrypt redo operations in hybrid cloud disaster recovery configurations where the cloud database is encrypted with Transparent Data Encryption (TDE) and the on-premises database is not. This feature provides more flexibility regarding the requirement to encrypt the on-premises databases for those that may not have adequate on-premises data centers to meet the MAA Gold RTO and RPO goals. It should be noted that encrypting both the on-premises and cloud environments is highly recommended for security reasons. However, depending on the environment and resources, we know that is not always an option. Therefore, this feature aims to lower the requirements for those who are quickly trying to get their DR configuration in place and may have challenges around the encryption requirements of the cloud.
* **Real-time Query for PDB Standby:** In Oracle AI Database 21c, Oracle Data Guard per Pluggable Database (DGPDB) was introduced, expanding DR configurations to allow for them to be enabled at either the PDB or CDB (default) level of granularity. This means that a single PDB could be independently failed over between two “primary” CDBs. While this flexibility allowed a lot more freedom in how Data Guard was deployed, many features available for CDB-level Data Guard configurations were not initially available for a PDB-level Data Guard configuration, including many of the Active Data Guard features. With Oracle AI Database 26ai, a key Active Data Guard feature allowing queries to be offloaded to standby PDB databases is now available, allowing for more scalability when using DGPDB, which makes use of all the resources available.
* **Globally Distributed Database (formerly known as Sharding) with RAFT:** Raft Replication enables rapid failover within seconds and zero data loss during node or data center outages, facilitating an active-active-active symmetric distributed sharded database architecture that enhances availability, simplifies management, and optimizes resource utilization globally. This synchronous technology provides another flexible option for the MAA solution, depending on the configuration.
* **Clusterware Resiliency:** Oracle Clusterware 26ai, the basis for Oracle RAC and used as a standalone cluster solution, has been enhanced to be more resilient to internal errors, providing more core availability to Oracle MAA Gold (and Silver) tier deployments. Previously fatal Cluster Synchronization Service (CSS) conditions can now be overcome by splitting CSS into restartable client-side and server-side daemons that can tolerate failures independently. In addition, proactive detection and correction of certain error conditions are performed, such as restarting ASM instances to remount an OCR disk group if no OCR diskgroup is mounted or moving the ASM listener if not co-located with the ASM instance.
* **Oracle RAC Fast Start Reconfiguration:** Instead of pausing work for reconfiguration and instance recovery after an instance crash, Oracle RAC 26ai Fast Start Reconfiguration allows work to start on clean blocks immediately, leading to work resuming 6x faster compared to Oracle Database 19c. This enhancement significantly benefits MAA Silver, Gold, and Platinum tier deployments.
* **RDMA-based Exadata RAC Scaling:** It is no secret that Exadata is the ideal hardware platform for Gold (as well as any tier above silver) MAA deployments of the Oracle AI Database, given the integrated hardware/software benefits (see Exadata MAA blog series here for more details). With Oracle AI Database 26ai, Oracle RAC performance on Exadata has made yet another leap forward by reducing the load on the LMS process with RDMA for commit propagation. The result is an application that can scale and maintain availability from the performance perspective, even under extreme peak workloads.

The features listed above are just some of the highlighted MAA features that tie in with Gold Tier RTO and RPO levels in Oracle AI Database 26ai that are certainly worth trying out on your own. Although I chose to highlight the features that I feel align most with the MAA Gold tier, many other Oracle AI Database 26ai enhancements impact the usability, flexibility, and overall capabilities of the technologies under the MAA umbrella, including Oracle RAC and Active Data Guard as well as other closely related technologies like GoldenGate 26ai. It should be noted that some of the new features above are still undergoing rigorous validation and testing via the MAA team’s Chaos Engineering methodology to determine their fit into the MAA tiers based on the multitude of planned maintenance and outage events and conditions. This type of validation never ends as the team constantly works hard to evolve our MAA architecture as the modern world continues towards technical advancement (AI being the latest).

## Learn More

* [Maximum Availability Architecture](https://blogs.oracle.com/maa/post/exploring-the-maa-gold-maa-tier-with-oracle-db-23ai#)
* [Oracle AI Database Features and Licensing](https://apex.oracle.com/database-features/)
* [Oracle AI Database 26ai: Where to Find Information](https://blogs.oracle.com/database/post/oracle-database-23ai-where-to-find-more-information)
* [Free sandbox to practice upgrading to 26ai!](https://livelabs.oracle.com/pls/apex/dbpm/r/livelabs/view-workshop?wid=3943)

## Acknowledgements
* **Author** - Glen Hawkins, Sr. Director of Product Management
* **Contributors** - Killian Lynch, Database Product Management
* **Last Updated By/Date** - Killian Lynch, October 2025
